on behalf of some James ethics enter the
wheeler Center the age the city of
Melbourne and the ABC I'd like to
welcome you here this evening to the
Melbourne Town Hall for the last debate
in the third season of intelligence
squared debate sping held here in
Melbourne
tonight we are gathered on the
traditional lands of the Kulin nation
and I wish to acknowledge them as with
traditional owners and also to pay my
personal respects and the respects of
those of us here on the stage to their
elders and to the elders of other
communities you might be here this
evening my name is Simon Longstaff I'm
the executive director of some James
ethics centre and I'm delighted to chair
tonight's debate now some of you might
be inclined to be tweeting tonight if
you are a tweeter there is live tweeting
available using the hashtag IQ 2o z IQ
to Oz and to all of you of course I
extend our really hearty welcome and you
will have found on your chair a formal
voting ticket and later on this evening
you'll be asked to cast your ballot and
that will allow us at the end of the
evening to make a comparison to do with
whether what you thought before the
debate and then how you've decided after
hearing the arguments it's a simple
process you tear it in half if you have
made up your mind for or against if
you're still undecided and I hope that
you won't be then just leave that voting
ticket as one whole piece and cast it
accordingly I should just explain about
the topic I hope people understand that
when it was being framed it was taken
for granted and perhaps it shouldn't be
that we're talking here about voluntary
euthanasia there's no under baiting the
proposition that people should be
compulsorily euthanized that that would
be a dangerous topic maybe for the
festival of Dangerous Ideas but that's
not what we're talking about tonight
we're talking about voluntary and
assisted euthanasia and to address that
topic I'm going to introduce the two
sides I'll introduce them all as a group
and then ask you to to welcome them in
the usual way so speaking for
emotion the first speaker is Beth Wilson
who became Victoria's health services
commissioner in 1997 she's a lawyer by
training and has worked mainly in
administrative law she has a
long-standing interest in Medicare legal
and ethical issues prior to becoming
health services commissioner Beth was
the president of the mental health
review board a senior legal member of
the Social Security Appeals Board
and work care appeals board and she's a
past president of the Victorian branch
of the Australian and New Zealand
Association of psychiatry psychology and
law in 2007 Beth was appointed a member
of the Disability Services Board she's
joined by the second speaker professor
Lowenstein a professor of law in the
Faculty of Law and also an adjunct
professor in the Faculty of medicine
dentistry and Health Sciences at the
University of Melbourne she's a member
of the NHMRC legislation review
committee on human cloning and embryo
research that the Hearing Committee the
Australian health ethics committee which
is one of the principal committees of
the National Health and Medical Research
Council and the Australian workforce
Advisory Council she served on numerous
federal and state advisory committees in
specially in relation to genetics and
the law and the third speaker for the
affirmative is dr. Philip Nitschke he's
got both a degree in medicine and also a
PhD and for more than a decade
Philip has been the face and the voice
of the voluntary euthanasia debate in
Australia and around the world he's the
author of a book called the peaceful
pill handled which is banned in this
country and killing me softly voluntary
euthanasia and the road to the peaceful
pill published by Penguin in 2005 would
you please welcome the speakers for the
affirmative
speaking against the motion the first
speaker is dr. Shakira Hassan a McKenzie
postdoctoral fellow at the Asia
Institute at the University of Melbourne
her research focuses on Muslim women
gendered violence and racialized
political discourse she completed her
doctorate at the Australian National
University and is a regular media
contributor on issues including gender
multiculturalism and Islam she's joined
by somebody whose voice you'll probably
immediately recognize if you listen to
the ABC and particularly with Walid
Ali's drive program Scott Stevens who's
the religion and ethics editor for ABC
online but also appears on radio and
television he's the editor translator of
the selected writings of the philosopher
Savoia Dziedzic and is currently working
on books with theologian John Milbank
and literary critic James Wood he's a
regular commentator on ABC Radio
National and of course on the telly
before joining the ABC in 2010 Scott
Stevens taught theology and ethics for
many years and he also trained for the
priesthood and served for several years
as a lay parish minister in the Uniting
Church and finally the third speaker for
the negative is associate professor bill
Sylvester who is the director of the
respecting patient choices program at
the Austin Hospital he's also an
intensive care specialist and a medical
consultant for donate life the Victorian
organ donation service and the president
of the International Society of advanced
care planning and end-of-life care
his current professional areas of
interest include advanced care planning
end of life care and organ donation he
undertook his original training in Perth
and London and has been at the Austin
hospital since 1986 would you please
welcome them all
ladies and gentlemen the proposition
before this house is that euthanasia
should be legalized I now invite Beth
Wilson to address this house with her
arguments for the affirmative thank you
I too would like to begin by
acknowledging the traditional owners of
the land that we're meeting on tonight
and to pay my respects to their elders
past and present and I'd also like to
acknowledge any indigenous people who
might be here in the audience with us
tonight
whenever I have this privilege of
acknowledging the first people of our
great nation it always reminds me about
my own elders and how important they are
in my life my mother's 92 years of age
she lives at home she mows the lawn
which is a bit embarrassing when she
mows out the front I can just hear the
towns folk will you look at that poor
old woman her daughter's the health
services commissioner you think she
could afford a gardener for a poor old
mum but pity help anyone who tries to
get between my mother and that mower my
mother's name is either May Wilson and
my favorite photograph of her is with
her newly born great-granddaughter in
her arms and she's called Anna either
May lovely photograph to have and of
course I consulted with mom about the
sensitive and important topic of
euthanasia voluntary euthanasia that
we're debating tonight and mum said I
want it she had not talked to your
brother about it and he wants to do a
surprise because mum usually tries to
have as much suffering involved in her
life as possible being the only daughter
in a family of 10 but it's really
interesting I'd give mum anything that
she asked me for but I can't give her
voluntary assisted euthanasia because
it's illegal I guess you all know you're
here tonight it's terrific we know each
and everything
one of us has one thing in common we're
all going to die
despite Botox despite liposuction and
anti-aging creams and the claims of the
so called anti-aging industry we are all
going to die
last time anybody checked the mortality
rate for human beings was still 100% we
might look a bit different than we used
to or stretched but we're going to die
so voluntary assisted euthanasia has got
to be legalized to allow each one of us
to make a choice about whether we will
accept treatment or not whether we
decide whether the treatment we're
getting is futile the word futile of
course has different meanings to
different people but it is very
important that we can express our own
choices about what happens to us and
that's why the law needs to be clarified
so that our doctors are not breaking the
law or risking manslaughter charges when
they do respect patient choices and also
the awful sight of desperate relatives
who've tried to assist a loved one and
who had then put on trial for
manslaughter about a year ago I was
diagnosed with breast cancer luckily for
me it was very early detection which is
why I wear breast screen Victoria's logo
every day they saved my life but any any
encounter with Jimmy dancer inevitably
makes you think about your own mortality
in fact when I went with great
trepidation to get my pathology results
the surgeon said while I was still
midair my bummer hadn't even touched the
seat he said oh it's good news Beth
you've got a 95 percent chance of dying
of something else and I said could you
just let me wrap my head around the good
news is before you start reminding about
all the other things that are going to
help me to shake off this mortal coil
what he said was true but I didn't think
a whole lot of his sense of timing at
the same time as I was dealing with
breast cancer my beautiful golden
retriever beau also
was diagnosed with skin with cancer he
was much sicker than me fortunately I
was able to make sure he didn't suffer
too much he was humanely euthanized and
like all golden retrievers
he ate liver treats until his very last
breath but isn't it strange that we live
in a world where I can do that for my
dog but not for a person I love
legalized euthanasia is a voluntary
concept it's about choice my dear step
granddaughters Jemima and Charlotte are
12 and 8 and I talk to them about
euthanasia and they asked me to explain
what I meant about us and they just
stared at me and said but shouldn't it
be their choice spot-on das euthanasia
does not suddenly become compulsory just
because it's legalized it is voluntary
it includes the right of competent
individuals to make advance directives
setting out what their choices would be
or should be if they become incapable of
expressing those choices for themselves
informed consent is a very important
legal concept it's about the rights of
patients to be given sufficient
information to allow us to participate
in decision-making about which
treatments we will or will not accept so
informed consent recognizes choice so
why on earth then are we able to give
informed decisions informed choice on
all aspects of our healthcare except
perhaps what is most important of all
the way we die denying people the right
of choice is a very outdated remnant
remnant of paternalism at it's very
worst everyone has the right to be
treated with dignity and respect and
patient autonomy is very paramount here
it should not be simply what churches or
medical advisers consider is
right or best for us every single one of
us should be able to have the right to
participate in and direct what health
care we will receive and to do that well
we need to be health literate we need to
be given accurate and adequate
information and the legal ability to
refuse treatments legalize euthanasia
does not negate the need for accessible
palliative care services I've been an
advocate of palliative care services for
a long time I think they do an
absolutely fantastic job in providing
support for people who are dying and
their families and the palliative care
volunteers are fantastic people who give
their time free of charge to be with the
dying and their families and they make a
huge difference however I am also told
by people that someone they loved the
palliative care was fantastic
up to a point by the time came when it
was no longer sufficient and they were
not able to ensure that their loved ones
had a comfortable death too many people
have endured unnecessary suffering while
their doctors try not so much to prolong
life as to ward off death those of us
who are arguing for legalized voluntary
euthanasia we care about our elders we
care about the ill and we care about
people with disabilities voluntary and
legalize euthanasia does not
discriminate against those paper people
it discriminates for them it's positive
discrimination by allowing them to
decide what is best for them and what
they may find unendurable arguing in
favor of legalized voluntary euthanasia
is entirely consistent with supporting
aged disabled or unwell people to live
healthy happy lives arguing in favor of
legalized voluntary euthanasia is can
sistent with arguing for accessible and
appropriate pain management's our health
policy should be based on principles of
social justice patient-centered care and
autonomy and legalize euthanasia is
consistent with these principles too
many people are committing suicide where
they've received diagnoses like dementia
very intelligent health literate people
making lonely choices in bleak
circumstances with family members coming
across the results of that if you need
any further evidence ask ambulance
officers what they see and their point
of view is very often not included in
the public debate dying should be a time
when human beings are treated with the
utmost respect a time when excellent
health services are available for us and
excellent support is there for our
families and carers it's not a time when
we should be abandoned ladies and
gentlemen the only sure way to respect
people's wishes is to make voluntary
assisted euthanasia legal so that we all
have a choice thank you
dr. Shakira Hassan so I am sitting
rather than standing at the lectern
tonight in order not to be distracted
from my own presentation by the effort
to stay vertical my balance and physical
strength have been eroded by repeating
relapsing multiple sclerosis
however while multiple cirrhosis may
have made it more of an effort to be
here it's also the reason why I'm here
like most of us I had not given too much
thought to the question of how I would
deal with some of the deepest human
fears until they stared me in the face
the fear of physical decline and
dependence the fear of protected
physical pain euthanasia is often
suggested as a means of circumventing
these bleak experiences and some people
with multiple cirrhosis say that it is
an option they would seek to exercise
were to be available for them and that's
a sentiment that I entirely understand
in between flares my health is
relatively strong and I've emphasized
the relative but the flares provide a
premonition of the future a future that
is full of unpleasant possibilities ms
is a disease of the brain and the
central nervous system an unpredictable
drama queen of an illness but so far and
none of its surprises have been pleasant
and I would just as soon not experience
too much of what it may have in store
for me but I think that the high level
of public support in most opinion polls
about euthanasia reflects at least in
part a reluctance to contemplate such
unpleasant possibilities we like to
think that we if you legalize euthanasia
were to become available we would not
need to experience the horrors that may
lurk in all of our futures for longer
than we think we can bear we do not need
to plan for them to make provision for
them to imagine what they may do to us
because we hope to be able to head for
the exit soon after they show their ugly
faces
we are only just beginning to grapple
with the issues raised by the fact that
Madson modern medicine has succeeded in
lengthening life expectancy without so
far providing a commentar and
improvement in the quality of life in
its final stages all for those with
chronic diseases some distance from its
final stages we face the imminent
prospect of an aging population
described by the novelist Martyn Amos as
a silver tsunami and an invasion of
terrible immigrants stinking out the
restaurants and cafes and shops
Amos at age sixty at the time of writing
identified himself as soon to be among
the ranks of these smelly immigrants by
the way he suggests that governments
deal with this blight by providing
euthanasia boots these on street corners
where all people could you know check in
to check out Amos the stone may have
been satirical but his support for
legalized euthanasia is well deadly
serious and I wrote those last two words
without realizing the double meaning
given the topic of course there are no
serious proposals to make euthanasia
compulsory euthanasia advocates retort
that since they have no intention of
imposing their choice upon me I am not
entitled to deny them their choice
euthanasia they maintain is the
patient's private decision which has no
effect on anyone outside of their own
network its advocates generally present
themselves as rugged individualists
battling to throw off the shackles of
the state which would deny them their
choice but I would argue that legalizing
euthanasia grants the state more power
rather than less legalize euthanasia
would not take place in a vacuum as is
appropriate for all medical procedures
it would be state regulated and
monitored and the states would
presumably be partially or fully state
subsidized and I do not believe that it
is appropriate for the state to
determine that the desire to ends one
life is in some circumstances a disease
to be combatted and controlled and in
other cases a rational decision to end a
life that is seen as holding less value
I do not believe that legalized state
endorsed euthanasia would be
economist decision in either the
circumstances in which it is made or in
terms of its consequences for others the
social stigma attached to the sazed
and disabled bodies would both shape
euthanasia decisions and be reinforced
by them even those who would not
themselves contemplate euthanasia would
have their lives devalued by its
availability to them I agree with
euthanasia advocates on one point under
our current health system many sick and
dying patients suffer an unnecessary
degree of pain and misery but I do not
believe that the lack of availability of
euthanasia is is one such is one such a
manifestation of unnecessary suffering a
society that does not grant speedy and
universal access to best practice pain
management and palliative care has no
business offering euthanasia as a
substitute some analysts argue that we
already accommodate so-called passive
euthanasia in the form of withdrawal of
treatment and/or painkillers that may or
may not hasten death this they argue is
unregulated euthanasia by stealth'
legalizing euthanasia would stream like
the practices practice bring it out of
the shadows but I do not see either of
these practices as occupying the same
ethical status or space as active
euthanasia treatment medical treatment
may help to extend life but it also
generates adverse and unwanted side
effects that may be more unpleasant than
the underlying disease to impose these
side effects without consent is assault
withdrawing treatment may hasten death
but where the intent is to improve the
quality of what life remains it's an
option that patients may justifiably
choose the same general principle
applies to the use of pain medication
used to enhance life at the
since of possibly shortening it even
probably shortening it sick people take
those kind of risks throughout the
course of their disease on a micro-level
it's a risk benefit assessment that we
all take or certain we all should take
every time we got down a panadol for a
headache Tim Ferguson veteran of the
Doug Anthony all-stars and stand-up
comedian who is career with the All
Stars it turns out and was cut short by
his diagnosis with multiple cirrhosis
describes how his doctor explained the
implications of this diagnosis the good
news is it's not going to kill you
the bad news is it's not going to kill
you and I have to say that the
reasonably limited impact of multiple
cirrhosis on life expectancy does not
strike me as being unqualified good news
but if and when I should be over
overwhelmed by these sentiments to the
point of asking my health professionals
even my family to help me to end my life
I want the people that I ask to be
legally obligated to refuse to look for
other options to say no and I won't take
this refusal well I'll be a bad patient
I'll be so annoying that I probably
won't need legalize euthanasia because
you know my health care professionals
perhaps other residents of whatever
institution I end up being cared for in
you know they'll murder me and think
that a prison sentence is a small price
to pay but that's how it is I'll throw
attentions
I might even demand it I might look back
on this talk and think it was all a
dreadful mistake but I'll be wrong and I
should be told so and I should be helped
to find ways to live not ways to die
we should legalize euthanasia this is
obviously a legal question and I'm going
to put to you some legal arguments I'll
be showing you how the law has moved in
various ways which could arguably be
towards legalizing voluntary euthanasia
I want to do this in the context of the
stories of the patients and to look how
the courts have regarded the
circumstances that have come before them
so think about Tony bland he was 17
years old when he went to the
Hillsborough soccer stadium to watch the
soccer and in northern England and
suddenly there was a great surge of the
crowd
pushing people forward and he was caught
on a cyclone wire fence with people
crushing against him and as a result of
this his chest was crushed he didn't get
oxygen to the brain and he suffered
severe brain damage he was taken to
hospital and for three years he lay
there obviously not able to communicate
to improve his condition at all his
nurses and parents carefully looked
after him but in the end that became
clear to people that this life was not
one that this young man would have
wanted to live so the hospital and the
parents together applied to the court
for an order that it would be lawful to
withdraw the treatment that Tony bland
was gay
and this went to the highest court in
England the House of Lords and the
judges there said it was lawful to
withdraw this treatment there were three
reasons it was futile to continue it
when it couldn't achieve anything it
imposed a burden on him which was not
justified by the prognosis and therefore
it wasn't in his best interests to have
the treatment continued so the treatment
was withdrawn and this included
artificial feeding and hydration it took
him 11 days to die
they've been lots of similar cases since
then some of them you'll be familiar
with the case of Terri Schiavo who had a
fall in Florida suffered brain damage
and then four years was kept in care
while 20 judges over seven years
considered whether it was lawful to
withdraw the treatment ultimately that
was decided to be lawful and the
treatment was withdrawn again with the
authority of the court in Melbourne we
remember Maria court whose body was left
for dead in the boot of her car
in South Melbourne so she's lying in
hospital in what was categorized as a
persistent vegetative state and an
application was made to VCAT in the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal that it would be lawful to
withdraw treatment and that decision was
made similarly in bwv a woman with picks
disease and her body was cruel curled up
in the fetal position for three years
she couldn't get any better and it was
decided that it would be lawful to
withdraw treatment now the second
category of patients are those who may
not be a sickest the first lot but are
able to communicate and these patients
are able to refuse treatment so we think
back to the days of John McEwen in the
1980s in Victoria he was in a
Trillian waterskiing and champion and he
became a quadriplegic after a diving
accident and he decided that he didn't
want to live this life on the ventilator
at that time the law was not clear and
so proceedings were taken to have him
sectioned declared incompetent under the
Mental Health Act so that he could be
continued to be treated even though he
didn't want that to happen but publicity
about that case and other cases of a
similar kind led to an inquiry in
Victoria which in turn led to the
passing of the medical treatment Act and
that enables people to refuse treatment
provided they follow the procedure in
the act
similar legislation was passed in
Western Australia after Christian
Rosita's case and he was also a
paraplegic that didn't want his
treatment to be continued most recently
judges have been saying particularly in
New South Wales that it is lawful for
people to make an advance directive
refusing treatment a common law you
don't have to rely on legislation so you
can refuse dialysis in advance for
example and that directive will later be
honored at the time when there's a
decision being made about that treatment
so something up to date we've got cases
where patients are critically critically
ill and can't communicate and it may be
lawful to discontinue their treatment so
they die and we've got cases where the
patients may not be critically ill but
they can communicate and they're
entitled to refuse treatment and that is
binding on the doctors and other health
professionals now you'll say that those
cases involve treatment being withdrawn
what about positive steps that doctors
might take that might hasten the death
of a patient well the law envisages that
that can happen too through the doctrine
of what is suck the so called double
effect
if a doctor gives a patient a drug even
though he or she knows that that pays
that drug will definitely cause the
patient to die more quickly but the
intention of the doctor is to relieve
the patient's pain and not to expedite
the patient's death then that is not
unlawful so this gives doctors a lot of
leeway in cases where their the patient
has severe pain which could be
alleviated by giving a particular drug
so you can see that the laws come a long
way in helping critically ill patients
to die if the patient can communicate
and refuse treatment then the law will
work well if they have unbearable pain
that can be relieved by a drug that
shortens their life the law will also
work well but it will not help patients
who are not being kept alive by
life-sustaining measures that can be
removed or who have pain that cannot be
relieved by drugs or overwhelming
distress arising from their
circumstances so this is the gap that
Beth Wilson referred to therapeutic
therapeutic measures or palliative care
are good so far as they go but there is
this gap where palliative care is not
the answer think of the case of Diane
pretty who was paralyzed by motor
neurone disease she couldn't take her
own life which would not be a crime
because suicide is no longer a crime and
she couldn't end her life by refusing
treatment because she wasn't dependent
on a ventilator yet her condition would
inevitably deteriorate and you can
imagine that she would not want to live
a life like that so if she's fully
informed and wants it why shouldn't a
doctor
be allowed to give her a drug to allow
her to die is this situation so
different from giving a drug to his pain
or distress knowing that it may cause or
hasten her death can doctors reasonably
say that they did not intend the outcome
on the principle of double effect when
the foreseeable consequence of their
action is that the patient will die or
die more quickly isn't it hypocritical
to say that switching off a life-support
machine is not an act but an omission to
struggle or that the patient then dies
from the illness and not from the drug
is it fair for one patient to be allowed
to die and the other to be condemned to
be kept alive
good evening
the feverishness the intensity over
euthanasia continues on unabated and
given I suppose how deeply personal how
deeply felt this issue is for so many of
us that shouldn't be surprising should
it what is surprising however is that
this debate seems utterly disconnected
out of step from the advances in pain
management over the last couple decades
in particular indeed it seems almost
entirely separated despite some of the
things we've heard tonight from a more
serious conversation about the benefits
of more holistic and even the more
pastoral dimensions that often accompany
palliative and hospice care the fact
that these two things are out of step
that we are better perhaps than we've
ever been at managing pain and yet this
frenzy this desperation in some quarters
of a society to see euthanasia
euthanasia legalized that suggests to me
that perhaps there's something else at
play here perhaps the issue isn't simply
claiming the right to die per se but
that the very desperation to be able to
claim this right to die is symptomatic
of something else so what might this
something else be well I'd like to
suggest to you in the time that I have
that this something else is in fact a
kind of Hydra headed monster and because
of that any serious debate of what makes
a good death today really can't take
place and let the unless there's some
kind of acknowledgment there's some sort
of identification of the fearsome form
of this Hydra and so I'd like to suggest
to you this evening that the push to
place let's be clear about what we're
talking about here the push to place
within the ambit of medicine itself the
ability to end a person's life
proactively
when that life is no longer deemed to be
of benefit the push in other words to
endorse medical killing as a practice
integral to the practice of medicine
itself that this very push is a
symptomatic of the fact that first of
all we live in a time in which the
greatest of all human virtues is the
ability to choose the degree of personal
autonomy in fact in our time we have
begun to assert the freedom the rights
and indeed the pleasure of the
individual body over and against any
other person or institution that might
lay a claim on that body whether it be
ones nation once tradition one's
community one's marriage wants children
or one's religion we live in a time in
other words where we all participate in
some form or another
in a kind of religion of the body this
body in other words that dominates in
our time is actually quite an a historic
concept it's a body that's stripped away
it's a body that's removed from those
things that in the past used to
determine individual existence the idea
being of course that each of us are born
into networks of obligation that we
don't necessarily choose but that we
must of necessity acknowledge the idea
in other words is that our lives are not
simply our own but our lives belong to
those who love us and indeed who are
loved by us today however the human body
is only determined by that which we
choose secondly this push to legalize
euthanasia is a symptom it seems to me
of a withering away of the very social
bonds within which notions like human
dignity honor respect obligation a
within a way of those very bonds within
which dignity once made sense
as we've seen so often of late
especially in debates surrounding asylum
seekers we live in a time in which
certain rights that is supposed to be
inherent to human bodies are suspended
at moments of convenience for the state
or indeed other institutions I think
that tells us something it tells us that
human rights are very irregularly things
that can be simply attributed ascribed
to a person by virtue of their
humaneness but instead the very notion
of those rights what makes them
meaningful in the way in which we
actually live is that those rights grow
up organically those rights are defined
in a way by the very relationships in
which we live and yet in our time it
seems to me that this notion of dignity
has been stripped back and indeed
suspended at the very moments not just a
political convenience but also in many
of the ways in which we've ostracized
we've separated out the process of dying
from human life I simply don't believe
that the push for to legalize euthanasia
can be separated from the way for
instance that we have largely abdicated
responsibility for our unwanted elderly
choosing instead to shovel them away
behind the opaque walls of third-party
care I do not believe that the push to
legalize euthanasia can simply be
separated from the way in which we
ourselves as a society have decided to
choose that our lives will not be
constrained by the lives that needs the
dependencies of others whether those be
our unwanted elderly or indeed our
unwanted unborn I also don't believe
that the push to legalize euthanasia can
be separated from the way in which we
have hidden the process of dying from
the normal processes of human living the
way in other words that Dyne has become
overly medical eyes in trapped behind
multiple layers of medical paraphernalia
and sterile bureaucratization the final
head to this multi-headed Hydra monster
is in fact that the right to death is a
symptom of the overarching fear of our
slow loss of autonomy in old age the
fear of the inexorable advance of
extreme dependence that we are living in
a unique time it seems when that fear
has replaced the fear of death itself
and so bringing all these things
together we have come to view our own
lives as private property and therefore
lives that ought to be determined by
nothing other than our own
choice and so what I'd like to submit to
you friends is that the desire to
legalize euthanasia is not at bottom a
compassionate desire to alleviate the
problem of unnecessary and undignified
suffering but rather the push to youth
to legalize euthanasia is in fact the
final solution to a problem that we
ourselves have created by so eroding the
social bonds that make human life
meaningful that give human life not just
the sense of meaning and purpose and
greater value but also those very forms
of obligation and dependency that make
life important to the very end both for
those cared for and those being cared
perhaps it's a fault of my imagination
but I'm not haunted by the images that
Shakira invoked before of of euthanizing
clinics on every corner
I'm not haunted by the images of dead
bodies being shoveled away into
anonymous graves that used to always
accompany Jack Kevorkian you'll recall
those allegations I'm not a vitalist I
don't believe that the prolongation of
human life is the only or even the
greatest good I don't have fears for
either of those things I am however
concerned by a society that is so
fetishized individual autonomy that is
so fetishized choice that it is led to
the overarching condition today where as
we age we fear of being loved
yes should we legalize euthanasia is the
question we're here debating and we've
got two groups we've got a group here on
one of them saying that we shouldn't
we've got another group saying we
shouldn't it seems to me we're saying
should we leave things as they are are
we happy with that or do we want to
embrace some change and are there good
reasons for embracing that change now
clearly I think we should embrace the
change it's not good enough to leave
things the way they are and to give you
an example or to flesh out a little bit
about why we can't leave things the way
they are I'd like to pick up on a point
that was raised by a doctor Shakira
when she made the point that she didn't
want the state waiting it's heavy hands
into this issue by bringing about
legislative change and having the state
a player in who gets the right to help
to die now the point I want to make is
that what we've got right now isn't very
satisfactory and I see a lot of it what
we've got right now is a situation where
the state is already a player in this
question it's not this disinterested
group it plays a very active role in
making sure that you don't get choice
let me give you some examples of how
that is the case just supposing well of
course the obvious one is that they
won't bring about legislative change
which are allowed to get legal help to
have help to die but so you decide now
without that law coming in that you want
to end your own life
all right buddy how are you going to do
it you're gonna have to get some drugs
to do that you're gonna have to get if
you want the best of the peaceful deaths
the best of the drugs and that's
Nembutal well the state's made it very
clear you're not going to get that
easily you're gonna have to import it
that's going to be against the law
they've recently increased the penalties
they put out a briefing sheet last year
saying that if any hapless elderly folks
try to go to Mexico to get that drug or
Peru or China you might be looking at a
quarter of a million dollar fine or 25
years in prison
for bringing in a drug that you simply
want to give you that choice of a
peaceful death so that's the state being
a player now I tried to get around that
using the special access scheme as a
doctor to import the drug for four of my
dying patients again the state was a
player it referred it after APRA --that
medical body which sits out there and
they said let's see if we can get this
doctor and show that he's not a fit and
proper person to be a doctor in
Australia that investigation is still
going on because I attempted to get this
drug which would provide the best and
most peaceful and reliable death to a
patient brought in for them well that
didn't work so I thought we'll try
something else and earlier this year we
developed the scene a scheme a lawful
scheme
no ill league get no illegal importing
of drugs a lawful scheme using bottles
of nitrogen that ubiquitous guess what
we're all sitting in the room breathing
here we're with a cylinder of that gas
you can have a reliable and peaceful
death it seemed a very straightforward
process we developed the scheme we made
it available to our members we've sold
over hundreds of them now to our members
but the state didn't like that it said
you can't go around doing lawful things
like that and again they referred it to
APRA the medical body the medical
regulatory board came back and said to
me we don't think that your activities
even though they are lawful constitute
actions which would make you a fit and
proper person to hold medical
registration in this fine country so now
I've got two simultaneous inquiries
going in to my fitting proper status the
state is a player it's making its views
clear you are not going to be able to
end your lives when we tried to put the
information out so that you could read
about it yourself and form your own
opinion have an informed decision what
did the state do the state banned the
book it was mentioned in the
introduction the only book banned in
Australia in 35 years that's quite an
achievement to have written something
that evil
but there was the Attorney General
overruled the decision the independent
decision of the office of film and
literature classification and got their
way the state is playing a position
taking a position you are not going to
have choice we're going to make sure
that it never happens so the state is
apply and state the state's writing you
up - it's a grubby little groin the
state is a player and that's the point
and so when we come along here and
debate this issue we don't want a state
in state out decision we want to decide
whether or not we can reposition the
role of the state and that's what I'm
going to be stating today that the
introduction of legislation is to
reposition that position that play the
role at the state play now in the
audience today this Jay Franklin some
people will have read about him in the
age three weeks ago Jay Franklin was
born of Hirschsprung's disease
he's now 35 he said 35 years of this
particular condition and he's formed a
pretty informed position that he doesn't
want it any longer he was given the news
from the Austin Hospital that there is
no more medical options for him he's
battled this for 35 years and he says
now I want to take this course and be
able to in my life but the state is
going to make quite sure that he doesn't
get that choice because what can he do
they won't bring in legislative change
he's not terminally ill he can't get the
drugs I suppose he could stop eating and
drinking but that's grim he could buy a
gun or a rope but hanging a silk or
shoot himself
what is his choice what I'm arguing is
that he have got to get right away from
this state and so the best thing perhaps
for him to do is to get out of the
control of this state go to a different
one go to Switzerland because at least
there you've got a state with the
courage to engage with this issue and
not play its role making sure that
people don't get this option so that's
what I'm suggesting now Jays problem of
course is that he doesn't have any money
luckily through exit my organization he
Dave Bedford in Brisbane who's had ten
years of high quadriplegia he's 30 years
old a third of his life spent as a high
quadriplegic he's had enough - he's not
terminally ill oh but he can't do
anything how's he gonna end his life
luckily he has some money and so the two
will help each other and that's nice the
two will help each other to get to hell
out of this state to get right away from
Australia Joe to Switzerland where there
someone will come along and say you've
made an informed decision here is member
you tell drink it if you want to
don't drink it if you don't want to you
die and Zurich you couldn't have that
choice back in Australia because your
government didn't have the willingness
to engage with legislative change and
it's not just legislative change there
are other things the state needs to do
bring in legislation for people that are
terminally ill of course give them
lawful options to end their life
decriminalized assisted suicide it's
ridiculous suicides not a crime the
state seems to be saying you can go
makinia said we don't care it's not a
crime but anyone who assists you can be
looking at a decade in prison in
Queensland Western Australia those
enlightened states it can be life
imprisonment for doing something that's
lawful get rid of this anomaly if you
can't get help people don't get help and
they flounder around they become
desperate desperate people do desperate
things the commonest method the elderly
use in Melbourne 2012 - in their lives
is not by going to Zurich it's by
hanging themselves now I think we ought
to be ashamed I think our politicians
ought to be ashamed the fact that they
will not break with the pressures that
they see and bring about legislative
change is a damning indictment on our
politicians
yes they're motivated they're pressured
by religious pressures but they should
have some courage maybe it'll happen in
Tasmania at last we finally got a
premier after 16 years from Marshall
Perrin in the Northern Territory that
most secular place in the nation finally
we have a place in Tasmania where we
might see legislative change so look
we've got to see changes and on top of
all of those changes legislative changes
decriminalize assisting suicide and for
God's sake
get rid of the censorship the dead
deadly hand of censorship which stops us
telling people how they can have a
peaceful death for fear they might use
it the government strategy keep people
sitting in a room smiling at the walls
giving them no information and I'll just
live long and happier lives it's rubbish
give people information you inform them
you empower them and that leads to a
healthier society thank you
I've been caring for dying people for
almost 30 years and I've been in
intensive care specialist for 25 years
looking after people after car accidents
and strokes through transplants and
cancer in fact I'd contests that I've
had more experience of dying patients
than anyone else in this room for the
last decade I've spent an increasing
part of my working day researching
developing and implementing advanced
care planning which is a term to
describe something quite simple how do
we ensure that we talk to people and
their loved ones about what to do if
that person becomes too ill to tell us
what they want when we as doctors have
to make life-and-death decisions I still
find it fascinating that whenever I talk
to anyone whether it be a federal
Minister for health and aging or a taxi
driver everyone relates to this in a
personal way we've all known someone
who's died and the story has either gone
well or it's gone badly so just last
Tuesday one of our medical colleagues
asked her next door neighbor to look
after a son so that she and her husband
could be in the audience tonight and
they are when the neighbor who I'll call
Jill heard about the debate she
immediately related her own story that
of her mother who had severe dementia
and who couldn't be left alone she was a
shadow of her former self and then to
top it off her mother got cancer the
bladder which was complicated by kidney
failure Jill could no longer look after
mum but rather than to refer her to a
hospice the GP admitted Jill's mum to a
nursing home which is when the problems
started
Jill's mum couldn't eat any longer
because it was such a struggle and she
choked on her food after getting advice
from my colleague Jill fought hard to
stop the nursing home from inserting a
feeding tube down her throat
into her stomach so instead the nursing
staff force-fed her instead of being
cared for by the GP who knew her jewels
mum was now the responsibility of the
local doctors who really only knew her
as mrs. X in room for the locum dr.
challenged the jewels saying you can't
not feed your mum and as a consequence
her mum missed out on palliative care
she progressively deteriorated wasted
away and in the last 24 hours a duel
faced was of an unconscious mum who
gurgled and gasped until she took her
final breath this was clearly not a good
death not surprisingly Jill now thinks
that the only answer is euthanasia and
there is a challenge the challenge for
those of us who believe that there is
nothing legal and humane in the way we
can allow people to die with dignity
without resorting to euthanasia Jill
will always remember that her mum did
not have a good death and it's easy for
all of us in this room to recognize a
bad death so therefore I'll ask you in
your time between now and when you vote
to think about what makes a good death
well we know the answers from the
patient's perspective in fact there are
five elements of people who are dying
have told us make a good death and what
they're really telling us is these are
the things that will help me live as
well as possible in the time that I've
got so what are they
firstly manage my symptoms with good
palliative care that means don't let me
suffer secondly
avoid prolonging my dine but that
doesn't mean euthanasia it just means no
inappropriate
interventions thirdly and crucially
allow me to have control and fourthly
let me relieve the burden on my family
and this means help me to talk about
what I want or don't want before it's
too late
and fifthly help me strengthen my
relationships which means that people
want to die knowing their relationships
with their family and friends are strong
and they have not left things unsaid now
all of these desires to live as well as
possible until the end can be delivered
through good palliative care and through
advanced care planning so when a patient
is given the opportunity to tell us what
they do or don't want near the end they
regain control they avoid a prolonged
death caused either paralysis of medical
and family decision-making which is
caused by not knowing what mum would
want and as a consequence they relieve
their family of the burden of having to
make uninformed decisions which I have
seen hundreds of times in my career
people too often don't know what they
have the legal right or if they are
unable to speak for themselves what
their substitute decision-maker has the
legal right to refuse treatment
so in Jules case she had the right to
tell the nursing home to stop force
feeding her mother and instead keeper
comfortable with medication and good
nursing care including the medication
the unit lion-skin refer to with the
doctrine of double effect unfortunately
there are too many doctors in our health
system who don't understand the existing
law that gives them the power to deliver
the
that they should be delivering now we
showed in a trial conducted at the
Austin Hospital that was published in
the BMJ that so profound is this burden
relief and the certainty of delivering
to Mum the care that she wanted that it
significantly reduced the symptoms of
anxiety depression and post-traumatic
stress disorder in the surviving family
members when we assess them up to six
months after the death of their loved
one the beauty of involving the family
in these intimate and heartfelt
discussions is that the elephant in the
room you know how's mum feeling and what
should we do when mum gets sicker is now
out in the open being discussed freely
which then leaves time to talk about
other important things the result is
stronger relationships before it's too
late so what's this got to do with
euthanasia well has everything because
it is these same sorts of factors that
cause people to turn to euthanasia when
they see no other solution I still
remember the first patient who raised
this with me in late 2002 in fact almost
10 years to the day eyes on the cancer
ward at the Austin hospital and I just
finished discussing her end-of-life
wishes with an elderly woman with
advanced cancer and as I walked away she
called me back and said doctor I'd like
to tell you that but for our discussion
I was thinking about euthanasia but you
have now reassured me that my wishes
will be known and respected when I can
no longer speak for myself I have
regained control and you have lifted
such a huge weight from my shoulders and
now I can concentrate on living as well
as possible in the remaining time that I
have I've heard many patients express
the same sentiments over the years it
told me that we as doctors can make a
profound difference if only we did our
job properly and
means talking honestly with our patients
about their end-of-life wishes it makes
such a difference the same can be found
overseas The Lancet recently published a
review of trends and end-of-life
practices in the Netherlands since the
introduction of euthanasia laws in 2002
they made several findings firstly that
there's been a drop in incidence of
doctors performing end-of-life practices
without an explicit patient request and
this has been attributed to better
palliative care and increased
discussions by doctors about their
patients end-of-life preferences in
other words advance care planning
secondly they've found that there's been
intensified alleviation of symptoms
independent of euthanasia activity and
this was also found in Belgium at the
same time and this has been attributed
to improved palliative care thirdly that
the rate of euthanasia or a physician
assisted suicide has not changed since
the introduction of the law we have a
legal an evil ethical solution today we
just need to start using it thank you
well ladies and gentlemen you've now
heard the arguments from the speakers on
the stage but if you've been to one of
these debates before you'll know they're
modeled on the Cambridge and Oxford
Union debates which have a floor debate
as an integral part of what's done so
it's now a chance for you if you would
like to speak in this debate you might
wish to advance an argument of your own
you may wish to pose a question what I
plan to do is to provide an opportunity
and you can see that there are
microphones on either wing there and if
you'd come to the microphone that may
mean forming a queue then you'll be able
to have up to a minute to speak now in
order to be fair what I plan to do even
though you might arrive in a different
order is to have those who wish to speak
for the motion and against the motion
and go in that order providing what I
hope is equal time if there are enough
people who would like to speak about
this then I will provide the opportunity
for the panel of course along the way to
respond to questions or to the comments
that are made so all I'd ask is if you'd
like to do this now please come forward
to other of those two microphone points
and I'll ask you to give your name and
then you have up to a minute to speak I
said we've got one speaker at the moment
you speaking for or against okay so
would you please give your name and your
minute begins now
my name is Flo Switzer I'm 81 my husband
is 88 and I think I have the right to
choose the moment I'm okay what I say to
people when they say how are you going
it happens at my age I say I'm doing
well for my age sure I've got problems
but I don't want to be dependent on
anyone else I've been active all my life
and I would have remained that say that
way and I want to be able to make my own
decisions
and I don't think I have written letters
for my kids 20 years ago by doctor
something I take to Anita tests if I
need something which says don't revive
me and I have a right at this age to do
to go the way I want it thank you feel
free to applaud the people from before
too now I'm gonna move across to this
side is there somebody he wants to speak
against the motion you may not be at the
front of the queue but if you want to
speak against it yes against the motion
say your name now please and if you can
begin I'm not I think it's too
simplistic to say that I'm either for or
against the motion
I think the motions very complex and I
welcome debates such as this so that
people can think about these things and
talk through them so and I have a
question for dr. Sylvester if I
understand correctly what you're saying
about what's happening in the
Netherlands and this will be of interest
to people who think that because the
legalization of euthanasia in the
Netherlands has caused an increase in
the number of practitioners who are
administering euthanasia to patients but
in fact the figures show that it's not
the case and as I understand what you
were saying it actually produces a much
better experience for the patient's to
know that the option is available for
them and it reduces their anxiety
they're able to talk through the issue
with their families and their carers so
the availability produces a better life
for the patients is that correct thank
you well now we're going to take some of
these questions on notice and wrap them
together somebody who wants to speak for
the motion yes hello my my position may
be seen as selfish but I believe it's a
fundamental
part of this argument or this debate and
that is whose life is this who owns my
life is it the state is it the church I
know that Scott Stevens believed it's
everybody else except me but it's this
is a very fundamental question because
if I don't own my life what about I have
no freedom at all I have no free will at
the end of the day this is a debate
between free will or imposed will and I
cannot even though I don't intend to
euthanize myself at any stage that I can
foresee I don't intend to do that but I
will not hand away my free will thank
you and that was perfect timing exactly
one minute okay somebody to speak
against the motion and then what I'll do
is I'm going to come and I'm can start
off with you Scott so be warned yes my
name's Jo donut I'm a registered nurse
of 30 years and I'd just like to make a
couple of points dying just like living
can be messy and it can involve
suffering and sadness and it can be
painful but euthanasia is not the only
alternative if we can send a spacecraft
to Mars surely we can within our
existing health care system provide
compassionate care that reduces
suffering to an absolute minimum it's
not black and white live or die yes we
have a right to make choices and you can
currently as a Victorian civilian
refused medical treatment by refusing
her by using a refusal treatments that
appeared under the current law under the
medical treatment act or you can appoint
an advocate who can refuse treatment on
your behalf and who can advocate for the
best possible palliative care to reduce
suffering and to give you the kinder
dear that you deserve and that you need
which is one that minimizes suffering
but it's not just leave or die it's
definitely how we do it but we can
create a better system in the current
system we have to improve care of those
thank you now I'm gonna try and get
through as many people as I can so
please bear with me but I just want to
start off with some questions really
directed to this side first and you
might want to comment on some of the
answers Scott they've been two speakers
now have been speaking for the motion
who have asserted quite passionately
their right to choose as part of free
will or simply as a right and this is
something that you fundamentally
question there's one if you could just
pick up on this as to whether you are so
certain in your own mind but that right
to choose should be subordinated to the
interests of others mm-hmm
thank you very much for both of those
questions in my deepest respect to those
who raised them especially you good sir
for doing so so passionately you you
said that there are two options one is
that you choose for yourself your
freewill and the other is imposition I'd
like to suggest though that those are
not the two only two options I often
think that freedom is overrated because
you have to begin asking will freedom to
do what that's one question of course
but I think there's a deeper question
behind that
where does your sense of freedom come
from in the first place
what defines it um in many places within
both the philosophical but also
theological traditions of the West
freedom is defined and not by the
ability to choose what you want but the
ability to choose what is best and I
think the idea that the state with all
respect to Phillip as well the fact that
the state is simply this overbearing
monster it may very well be but that's
not that's not the real enemy I think
that we're talking about here the enemy
is that we fundamentally had abdicated
the social responsibility this is
something happens organically within
society itself the social responsibility
to educate to shape to create systems of
value in other words I think free will
is important but I think that free will
has to be defined by the experience of
life of friendships and community the
one of the thing that I'll say is often
hear people say that life is a gift well
what sort of gift is it if I can't give
it away if I can't do something with it
what I'd like to suggest is it most
fundamentally human life isn't a gift to
ourselves but rather our lives our gifts
to those who love us and those that we
love it seems to me that that then
begins to redefine so many of the rights
that we begin claiming in debates such
as these thinking that you think that
suicide is wrong then to choose to end
your own life not only to ask someone
else to do it is that right
yes I I do but I would not agree with
the traditional particularly Catholic
objections to suicide that it's a sin
against one's own bodies anybody want to
comment on I'm very strong and please
the freedom of choice is not the point
that should be pristine one thing is God
I mean you're talking about the monster
thesis and you're going on about
describe the state as being monstrous
but hell you're the one who brought up
the many a Hydra headed monster you're
the one who's somehow already managed to
get it into the final solution you
managed to work that into your text and
somehow got onto abortion for chrissake
so I don't know how you did it but like
that these are concepts which I'm a
little bit skeptical about here okay um
I just want to comment on Scott's
comment that freewill has to be defined
well I would say by whom my mother's
life was certainly a gift and my life is
the gift that she gave me and that's why
I respect her free will bill there was a
there was a kind of a comment /
clarification sort from you about
whether or not the introduction of laws
allowing voluntary assisted euthanasia
in places like the Netherlands and
Belgium on your evidence seems to have
improved the regime for palliative care
and advanced care directives is that
what you were suggesting has happened no
the two are not linked I say the the
fact that voluntary euthanasia has been
introduced in the Netherlands and
Belgium may well have inadvertently
raised awareness amongst the doctors
here so in fact what we've seen is that
voluntary euthanasia
has not gone up in those countries since
it was legalized and therefore there's
not a net there's not a need that's been
met improve palliative care has made the
difference and increasing the awareness
I think the other point to make is that
really this is a thin edge of the wedge
if we talk about as lone skin talked
about giving people the opportunity to
have this gap met well where do we draw
the line what's the entry criteria to
that room of death is it essential
suffering is it someone who's depressed
can then take there have have their
adopter take their life what if they're
just a bit tired of life what do they
feel that they're a burden on their
family so the other point is how do we
know it's free choice when we talk about
free choice I know as doctors we can
talk people in or out of almost anything
and particularly when they're vulnerable
that is the absolutely accentuated so if
that's the possibility and once you
euthanize someone there's no going back
then I see that the state is actually
there to protect ourselves okay so you
in the same way as seatbelts drinking
and driving and so on the state is there
to protect ourselves you've gone a bit
further than the question about the
connection between the two and made some
additional points so I think only I'll
come back in a moment to see what might
be the criteria you would recommend to
ensure that people are not just being
talked into an early death and is this
something which is available to people
who are feeling sad and the doll you
want to try to comment on that now do
you learn just do it now briefly and
then I'll come to the yes I don't think
that anybody is suggesting that people
should have it on demand there will
always be a review process and this
could be initiated by other people as
I'll explain later okay so let's get
back to the floor is there somebody here
who wants to speak for the motion on
this side yes you come to the front if
you'll for the mode are you for the
motion sir okay you say there's somebody
at the front side the microphone - over
here you turn it up please yep my name
is dr. Rodney Syme I've been a long-term
involvement
in helping people at the end of their
lives I'd like to address a question to
Bill Sylvester you suggest that there
were five criteria which were necessary
for a good death and the third one was a
sense of having control I'd suggest to
you that while the control over the end
of the life risk was the doctor the
patient does not have control somebody
on this side who is against the motion
anybody here against know somebody
against the motion here on this side no
is there anybody who wants to speak
against the motion at the moment I'll
give you priority to the leap to the
front otherwise I'm going to go just in
the order in which people have turned up
for the time being okay so let's have
there's somebody here you're against the
motion
I was surprised to actually change my
mind throughout this debate I've always
thought for a long time being very much
for euthanasia but I sense that there's
a moral hazard that emerges when people
can take their lives easily not to say
that we wouldn't have some kind of
stopgap to prevent people from making
you know decisions in the heart at the
moment heat of the moment but more that
if people what a thought that occurred
to me was that if people can take their
lives when they're in immense pain the
number of people in that situation will
decline yes but will we lose the
incentive to find treatments for these
conditions what I'm going to do now is
discovering the order in which people
are there for a while but let me clarify
I may have muddied the waters a little
bit by asking Scott Stevens his views
about suicide but that's not what we're
debating tonight it's not whether or not
you can choose to die we're trying to
decide should the law be changed to
allow another person in a voluntary
basis to assist you to die that's that's
the issue so let's take a few people
from before you get at each killing
minute so you're naming your mean
opinions now sir
Ellen Rothschild I'm a research lawyer
this statements addressed to both the
opposition I was against there are the
three Benelux countries Netherlands
Belgium Luxembourg have all legislated
for euthanasia two states in America
legislated for assisted dying otherwise
known as assisted suicide Oregon and
Washington
none of those societies are fallen into
an abyss that each of those societies
report heavily specifically to dr.
Sylvester I'm happy to debate with you
till the cows come home
as far as statistics go on the
Netherlands particularly Australian
studies and Netherland studies which are
the non voluntary with the nature in
Australia by our exceeds that in the
Netherlands thank you and we'll move
across to this side microphone one my
name is Lily I'm also a registered nurse
in Melbourne I work in an acute care
setting where I regularly see people die
what I would call not a good death which
I would attribute to an inadequate
training of medical and nursing staff in
palliative care who are not palliative
care specialists there's also often long
wait times for hospice beds as well as a
complete lack of support for families to
have in-home care to allow their family
members to die with them in the home I
would like to ask William whether or not
he foresees a situation where palliative
care could ever be given the kind of
funding that could allow everybody a
good death and if not can we really
justify denying them another option
I'll take and it's like two more from
the floor and then we'll come back to
the panel yes thank you I'm William
Poole's I'm a teacher
I just wanted to challenge the negative
side on their outlook Scott Stevens you
were saying if only we could treat
nursing home patients better then things
would be certainly so much better and we
wouldn't have to resort to euthanasia
and then professor Sylvester you were
singing the praises of the palliative
care system but from the lady we just
heard from it appears that there are
serious gaps in the palliative care
system even though it's a very good
system now seeing these gaps and these
problems exist
surely the denial of euthanasia is
something like a utopian view when we
have such a negative kind of situation
for the aged person here come back good
evening my name is Berta I'm a 64 year
old mother of Jason Franklin than Philip
mentioned earlier in his speech my son
does have a advanced care plan at the
Austin which he put in place quite a
number of years ago after massive
surgery in 2007 between frating hours
and then he had to be returned to
theater which if we may have had it that
in place he may have not had to suffer
he is on pain medication which is a
liquid medication because of his so he
has such short cut but nobody is sure of
how much he absorbing of that so the
only real answer to that would be some
kind of palliative care which because he
is not terminal probably would not come
to his aid so even though it is a very
stressful thing I support his decision
for euthanasia because it is not a
matter of just giving up he had to go
through a psych evaluation just sign
that
the care plan and he was the Syst as
being a fit mind to do that and so he is
still a fit mind to make this decision
and I support him right down to the end
of this road bill there have been a
number of comments directed to you one
is from a colleague doctor who is saying
that if one of the five things that
people value is control how can that be
considered granted to a person when
ultimately it's the doctor who is
deciding and secondly they've been a
number of questions about if society
chooses not to fund the palliative care
system to the degree that I think you
would like it to I think they're asking
isn't been in those circumstances the
availability of euthanasia a reasonable
thing to provide in the absence of that
alternative thank you well the way I'd
respond to the comment about lack of
control I think indicates that there's
not a good understanding about what
advanced care planning can deliver and
what advanced care directives are able
to do to support the patient having a
say about what's gonna happen in the
future the whole point of a refusal of
treatment certificate or any of the
other legal documents is that those
patients can then put in place if they
do not want treatments they choose not
to have from now to the future in fact
when we do advance care planning we
empower patients to ever say about
what's going on now we've seen many
patients who said I now want to have the
tracheostomy out I now want to refuse
any further surgery blood transfusions
antibiotics and that is then followed so
in fact they do have control through
advanced care planning the the issue
that in a sense if society won't feel up
its fund palliative care regime
available to all who need it
would you agree as they're putting to
you that in those circumstances
euthanasia
is a reasonable alternative well no in
fact I think it's asking the wrong
question if the state is not funding
palliative care correctly we need to be
going to the state and saying we need
more funding for palliative care but
then assume that because the state's not
providing that we then put in a whole
new legal system which is going to
require many more checks and balances
would be in fact much more expensive the
cheaper option and the more appropriate
and ethical option is to provide proper
palliative care which is exactly what
we're on about through our International
Society of advanced care planning and
end-of-life care Shakira I'd like to
note that there are other what would you
call it communities there are very high
suicide rates groups of people who are
facing seemingly intractable and very
difficult social situations but we don't
regard assisting suicide as the
productive way to deal with them suicide
rates in some indigenous communities are
frightening lehigh suicide rates among
asylum seekers who have really seen just
about the worst that this can have to
offer and I'll say as a side note my MS
diagnosis was easier to take from having
not long beforehand done field work in
Afghan refugees in Pakistan because it
made me feel that no disease no matter
what could be as bad as the suffering
that had been undergone by some of the
people I've interviewed my family my
loved ones were safe I was in a country
with a you know imperfect as we've noted
but functioning health system but I'll
get back to that we don't think that the
appropriate way for governments to
respond to that is saying it look you're
right life sucks and your community it's
going to take a long time to fix those
problems and it probably won't happen
for your generation and we understand
why you tried to kill yourself and look
we'll provide a faster more effective
less Missy way for you to do it that's
not a proposition that anybody would
make and rightly so
so why I mean I know the slippery slope
argument with euthanasia is seen as
being you know you know scare mongering
and chih-wei and yeah I'm not fond of it
myself
but I think that if we are to avoid
these discriminations between different
types of suffering and what is and is
unacceptable to help you on your way
just right away from it then we have to
be prepared to write that slippery slope
all the way to the bottom and I don't
think we are thank you I'm going to
please oh yeah
one quick response on the slippery slope
argument which is kind of a few times or
on other things that have been raised
here then I've got to go what only be
able to do is to take four more people
from the audience before we need to
start something up and collecting the
ballot so the sane I think that the
argument with regard side by people with
mental or social problems is a quite
different situation from what we're
discussing today we're looking at the
right of competent people or people who
are acting on their behalf if they're
not able to make their own decisions to
make decisions at the end of life I
would like to ask a different sort of
question both of the our opponents and
also perhaps dr. Nitschke or dr. Rodney
Syme and it relates to what we see as a
gap in the situations where palliative
care is able to solve all the patient's
problems I'm not a doctor but I've read
a great deal about the situations where
people say what I want can't be given to
me by pain relief so I invite anyone to
speak on on that issue come back to that
at the moment thanks I don't know
apologies to those who've been waiting a
long time I've only got time now to take
four people wore speaking from the floor
I'll take two from each side so if
you'll each have a minute if you go
shorter I might fit somebody else in so
where you go Daniel so one thing that
mr. Stevens has said is that our
approach to freedom today means that we
don't approach our obligations
responsibly and I agree that we are born
into obligation to our loved ones but
think that we need to ask what the
nature and content of those obligations
are and I think that that's a matter for
discussion and communication between
those people that love each other and if
they decide that it is consistent with
their obligations to each other to help
assist one person leave the world and
leave the pain that they're in then why
should the state be involved in that
discussion and that communication I'd
Furman my name is Michael I'd like to
thank you all for a wonderful debate
I'm a doctor who works in palliative
care and I had a question in regards to
relating to the of the the many
challenges that we face working within
the field of palliative care our fears
of medications and their effects such as
morphine and that palliative care could
be equated with a person now being given
up on we would frequently spend time
allowing these fears and aiding people
making choices that fulfill the
realistic hopes that they have based on
their situation and I would just ask the
panel to address the question is is
there any risk that through the way this
important debate is conducted that we
may actually turn some people away from
the care the palliative care that they
may need through some of the fears that
are raised through this debate
Thank You Ruth Friedman with a question
for bill Sylvester I just wondered if
you could elaborate on the situation
where people are not terminal and
they're not in pain and they're not
needing to make a decision about
withdrawal of treatment how you could
actually argue your position for those
people
hi there my name's Luke skulls and I'm
here tonight because of and I'm sure
like many other people of witness the
unnecessary suffering of loved ones I
just want to suggest a couple of little
things that Professor Sylvester brought
up tonight and that's the opportunity to
design to develop and to consult on
something like an advanced care plan is
the opportunity that very very few
people have it may be your experience
that you are to develop things like that
with people that my experience we didn't
have the opportunity to do such a thing
and also with regard to your comment
about and the fact also that the law
change in the Netherlands has seen no
increase in voluntary euthanasia and
your suggestion that there is no need
being met I might suggest that that need
is being met in the minds and the hearts
of people who are concerned about the
way they're going to die my name is
Geraldine Kunstler and I'm only going to
ask not ask even anything state to state
things number one Prentiss Scott spoke
about freedom was talking about freedom
- or freedom from now freedom from is
totally totally impossible for people
with dementia Alzheimer's for whatever
and they have are not in any position to
make decisions and the other question is
- professor Sylvester how does
palliative care differ quantitive living
from euthanasia
it's just in my book slow you today yeah
thank you
well thank you for your questions and
comments and I'm going to ask our
panelists to address those so far
unanswered questions as they sum up so
if you could wrap in some answer to that
particularly this issue about palliative
care what to do when it's not effective
when it's not available or advanced care
directives haven't been made available
in this gap that was asked about between
what palliative care can and can't do as
this happens and you'll ask you to
listen to these remarks they'll be given
two minutes each to our speakers in the
order in which they first spoke so bill
you'll have some time to prepare your
final remarks you're going to be asked
to vote even though they're still
summing up the core arguments will have
been put and I remind you now when you
vote that you should have a voting slip
if you're undecided if you don't want to
cast a for or against and it may not be
that you're undecided you may not simply
want to do that because you think it's
too complex and issue to be reduced to
this
then just put your vote in still join
together otherwise please tear it in
half and put for or against as you're
inclined to do it will be two minutes
for each of the speakers as the ballots
come around starting with Beth Wilson
Beth you can address the issues of
inmate or introduce new points short
term units begin now
well thank you for allowing me to be
involved it's been really really
interesting it was not supposed to be a
debate about suicide I I respect
Shakira's desire to choose what happens
to her but she can't decide what should
happen for me I claim that right for
myself I've fascinated by Scott's
characterization of our society as one
in which we have abandoned our elderly
it's a great insult to every single
worker in aged care services
and of course not all of our elderly
people are in nursing homes or in
residential care at there's many many of
them living very happy healthy lives in
a society that has not abandoned them
the concept of being afraid to be loved
Scot I'm very worried about you
I'm not afraid to be loved is there
anyone out there who thinks they could
possibly love me Thank You Owen and of
course bill Sylvester I've always
respected the fantastic work that he
does however he is a doctor and he just
can't help being a little bit
paternalistic he really does love
helping people but find it a little
harder to think that they may know how
they do or don't want to be helped the
slippery slope well frankly I think we
should ban birth because birth leads to
death
dr. Sakura Hussein from the floor but
giin Aryan actually it was a comment
from the floor she said when she's asked
how she is she says well considering my
age and I tempted to say well
considering my MRI scans which
apparently are a lot worse than my
physical mobility but anyhow but I'm
coming back to that point about when
it's rational and appropriate to assist
suicide and I would say too lon
who talked about how we are talking
about people who are competent to make
that decision I can introduce you to
some suicidally depressed asylum seekers
say who have survived the most horrific
experiences that it would be an insult
for me to say well you can just get over
that she'll start again discover you
know the joy of life smell the roses I
wouldn't dare to do that but I would not
think it appropriate to help them die
either and I would not describe them as
incompetent not remotely so why
distinguish between when it is or isn't
appropriate to judge that it's okay to
help somebody on their way I would not
judge somebody as an ethically or
morally lesser being because they
couldn't manage to take another single
step just couldn't manage to keep
putting one foot after another but I
would not either push them out the door
I want to pick up a number of a number
of fears that people have expressed both
our opponents and from the wider
audience that changing the law might
endorse medical killing that it would be
state regulated and the stake would
decide whose life has less value that
people would be shunning responsibility
for the care of their elderly that human
dignity is
stripped-back now all of these fears
assume that it'll be the doctors who are
making these decisions and are all
greedy relatives and I think it's
important to bear in mind from the
perspective of the law that we have a
very careful system of review of
decision-making and anybody who is
concerned about the treatment that a
patient is having in hospital can apply
to have that decision reviewed by a
court or a tribunal and you may think
that the courts and tribunals are likely
to give the nod to this person being
swiftly dispatched particularly if
medical views seem to support that but
on the contrary when you read the case
law the judges are very careful to
assess the person's likely quality of
life and if the person has a quality of
life that even is a value to them that
we would not imagine for ourselves that
we would want to have a life limited in
that way just to feel the wind through
her hair as was said in a recent English
case to be able to smile when a song is
played in that case the court would not
approve the removal of treatment from
that woman because there was still value
in their life so I think we can judge
trust out our courts and tribunals to
watch over all this very carefully
scoffs favors um Philip began his
remarks by asking should we leave things
as they are Philip I suspect that that
is our one point of agreement this
evening I do not believe the things
should simply stay as they are we have
created an anomalous oftentimes cruel
most often capricious system and we can
I think through the debate tonight we
can see many of the gaps many of the
contradictions that are beginning to
emerge where I'd fundamentally disagree
with Philip is that I refuse to give up
on a more organic healthy rich social
society based solution to many of the
things that we've discussed tonight I do
think that the way in which and this is
part of the testimony of many of those
who work within third party aged care I
do think that the way in which many
families in many aspects of our society
have abdicated our responsibility for
the elderly
that's no disrespect to those who work
in this in the in the sector it's
actually part of the testimony of those
who work within the sector one of the
things that I do think is becoming
incredibly important is that we retrieve
the notion of hospitality that lies at
the heart of the hospital and hospice
system one of the great Christian
revolutions of the fourth century right
up to the 11th century was the intention
to bring the dining in from outside of
the walls of the city and to integrate
them within the life of human society
itself part of that was being cemeteries
from outside of the city into church
yards into the city itself in other
words to embrace the process of dying
with intense friendship companionship
this is what many Christian Christian
theologians referred to as the double
defeat of death Christ has overcome
death in the resurrection but now it's
our responsibility to help those in with
those that we love through the process
of dying and dying finally with dignity
so triskin the thing I don't like about
coming to debates like this is that the
opposition always get all the questions
and so we sit here and have to just
simply provide feedback on their answers
to the questions which the audience
overwhelmingly I would say support
legalizing voluntary euthanasia but
nevertheless just looking at a couple of
the themes which have emerged and I
suppose just in my way I should say at
the conclusion look Scott I know you are
looking towards this healthy rich
societal based solution but don't
contrast that with me presumably someone
who's looking for an unhealthy
impoverished non societal based solution
that's not where I'm coming from either
but some of the themes that have emerged
really do relate or come back to this
question of control and this comes up
with professor bills to some let's come
up repeatedly with him when he says with
when you give people control when you
listen to them ask them what they want
they regain control but that as Rodney
sighs it is only partial control when
you are the one who makes the final
decision true control is when you give
the control back to the patient and
that's something which can never come in
the current situation without changing
the law
now now palliative care is incredibly
important it's come up at time and time
again all of the people I know those in
serious health problems those who are
dying what want it want to see what it
can deliver but we shouldn't be telling
them that that is the start and the
finish they want to try it some will
turn away from it some will find it
provides all of their solutions but when
I come to someone like Jay Franklin
who's had 30 years of this he's had the
best palliative care in Melbourne can
offer he's had the best medical
treatment that can be provided in
Melbourne and he at that stage has
talked about his plans his advance
planned his future planned directives
and he still says look I want access to
a peaceful death and the best we can
give for him is a one-way ticket to
Zurich I think we can do better in my
final comments I'm going to try and
cover some of the questions and comments
all raised let's not beat around the
bush on this euthanasia is a deliberate
taking of life whereas palliative care
is a caring compassionate treatment of a
patient suffering and helping them to
live as well as possible so for those of
you in the audience or on this panel are
not happy with the delivery of care at
the end of life and do something about
it what are you all doing about it I'm
committing my career to working on this
I'm meeting with the Minister for ageing
next week to talk about this as I have
done before so I'd ask all of you why
don't you do something about it if
you're unhappy with a level of
palliative care in this state in this
country then contact your local Member
of Parliament and make a point that you
think things need to improve now Beth
who I have great respect for I think
you're actually a bit dis enjoy
disingenuous about suggesting I'm
paternalistic when in fact I run a
program called respecting patient
choices which is in fact moving the
pendulum towards teaching doctors and
nurses to ask patients about what they
want and respect
in that at the end of life I also agree
that advanced care planning should be
much more available than it is at the
moment my contention is that it should
be available to all people in any stage
of illness or health and in Everett for
every resident in the nursing homes in
Australia now Beth emphasize if it's
about choice but there's the rub
how do we know it's free choice I've
already pointed out that doctors can
talk patients in and out of any
treatment and there's no going back
our respect for elderly people is that
we would not expose them to the risk of
voluntary euthanasia and state-sponsored
death is a step too far and not a step
that this doctor wishes to take I think
the main risks from a doctor's
perspective is that patients
particularly the elderly who are
vulnerable because of recent or chronic
illness feeling like they are in the way
a burden to their family and to the
health system who will be coerced
whether it be subtly or inadvertently to
see the only solution to their
predicament is to end it all
thank you before before I wind up and we
find out what the result is there must
be some places where palliative care is
unable to relieve suffering is it there
are some places what what then I'm sure
in fact I am aware that there are some
cases where patients have got to a point
where they believe that their level of
function in life
their ability to conduct a life that
they see is acceptable particularly when
they have AK internal condition is a
state of health that cannot be treated
by giving morphine or some other sort of
medication and I labor over those cases
myself but what I believe what I truly
believe I'm not just saying this as part
of tonight's debate is that the great
risk of the many people if we did
introduce legalize euthanasia would
far outweigh the suffering of those few
people now one thing we haven't touched
on tonight and you know it's very easy
for Philip to say well you know this
guy's got to go and find someone else
who's got some money to go off to
Switzerland anyone can stop eating and
drinking if they like within 10 days
well it's true but it is a terrible
thing to do isn't it so just man will in
fact well I'm happy to share the
research with you but in fact we have
had many cases where people have chosen
at a state of ill health to stop eating
and drinking and in fact they don't
suffer and it usually means that within
about 10 days have died because of
kidney failure and it is a not suffering
yet okay thank you people as I say the
beginning about respectful even
passionate disagreement but always
respectful in a moment I'm going to get
the open the votes being counted before
I do that I want to thank people for
this debate the people who put it on the
wheel or center staff here from some
James ethics centre the management of
the Town Hall the age the ABC and the
mayor and the aldermen and the offices
of the city of Melbourne who also
support these debates and of course our
supporters a MP and before we hear the
results I just like whatever the result
happens to be to thank our speakers so
we do join me in please and thinking
Beth Wilson loans the filters to secure
a science bust a visa bill
now some people think that for topics as
serious as this that it debates not a
very good way to proceed that
deliberative democracy and other things
would do it what we hope with these
debates is that they help to advance the
conversation and the deliberation will
take place afterwards and I should also
explain about these results that you
know there was a pre poll and then there
was a and after poll the one that you
just cast and some people judge these
things by the absolute numbers and
sometimes it's by the size of the swing
so here's the results at the beginning
of this debate 7.5 percent were against
the motion 10.5% did not know and 82
percent were for the motion at the end
of the debate the undecided have reduced
not by a huge amount but down to 6
percent against the motion 9 percent
but with a significant margin the motion
is won by the affirmative with a vote of
85 percent in favor this
this is the last debate for a year we
hope you've enjoyed the season if you've
attended other debates we look forward
to bringing more to you in 2013 and ask
you when you go there's various bits and
pieces of paper order papers and things
if you could take them with you from
here in the town hall but finally I'd
like to thank all of you as members of
this house for your support and
participation in this debate which I now
declare to be closed good evening